Starter Tutorial (Using OpenAI)
This tutorial will show you how to get started building agents with LlamaIndex. We’ll start with a basic example and then show how to add RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation) capabilities.
Set your OpenAI API key
Section titled “Set your OpenAI API key”LlamaIndex uses OpenAI’s gpt-3.5-turbo
by default. Make sure your API key is available to your code by setting it as an environment variable:
Basic Agent Example
Section titled “Basic Agent Example”Let’s start with a simple example using an agent that can perform basic multiplication by calling a tool. Create a file called starter.py
:
This will output something like: The result of \( 1234 \times 4567 \) is \( 5,678,678 \).
What happened is:
- The agent was given a question:
What is 1234 * 4567?
- Under the hood, this question, plus the schema of the tools (name, docstring, and arguments) were passed to the LLM
- The agent selected the
multiply
tool and wrote the arguments to the tool - The agent received the result from the tool and interpolated it into the final response
Adding Chat History
Section titled “Adding Chat History”The AgentWorkflow
is also able to remember previous messages. This is contained inside the Context
of the AgentWorkflow
.
If the Context
is passed in, the agent will use it to continue the conversation.
Adding RAG Capabilities
Section titled “Adding RAG Capabilities”Now let’s enhance our agent by adding the ability to search through documents. First, let’s get some example data using our terminal:
Your directory structure should look like this now:
├── starter.py └── data └── paul_graham_essay.txt
Now we can create a tool for searching through documents using LlamaIndex. By default, our VectorStoreIndex
will use a text-embedding-ada-002
embeddings from OpenAI to embed and retrieve the text.
Our modified starter.py
should look like this:
The agent can now seamlessly switch between using the calculator and searching through documents to answer questions.
Storing the RAG Index
Section titled “Storing the RAG Index”To avoid reprocessing documents every time, you can persist the index to disk:
What’s Next?
Section titled “What’s Next?”This is just the beginning of what you can do with LlamaIndex agents! You can:
- Add more tools to your agent
- Use different LLMs
- Customize the agent’s behavior using system prompts
- Add streaming capabilities
- Implement human-in-the-loop workflows
- Use multiple agents to collaborate on tasks
Some helpful next links:
- See more advanced agent examples in our Agent documentation
- Learn more about high-level concepts
- Explore how to customize things
- Check out the component guides